# Definitions and behaviours of the system

## Definitions

- (bidi) terms like "next" / "after" or "previous" / "before" refer to (respectively) the next or previous bit of data in memory or a data-structure like the DOM (logical order) and make no assumptions about how that is perceived directionally (visual order).  In an rtl context (eg arabic), the visual order of next/after is leftward, and previous/before is rightward .  In an ltr context (eg english) it is vice versa.
- F_ELEM (focusable element)
  - an element that the user can navigate to and focus on in order perform operations
  - it can be F_REC or F_NONREC
  - not an IF_ELEM as these are already focusable
  - not a TOKEN
- IF_ELEM (inherently focusable element)
  - any element that is "already focusable" - eg form controls
- F_REC (focusable recursable element)
  - an F_ELEM that we can focus on and navigate into
  - usually an F_REC's text-bearing DOM nodes are editable
  - example: a `<div>` element is usually focusable
- F_NONREC (focusable non-recursable element)
  - an F_ELEM that we cannot navigate within; we can focus on the element itself but not recurse into it or focus on the contents; as a result we cannot edit the text-bearing nodes; these elements may require special edit behaviours
  - use F_NONREC's to create islands in the DOM that are managed/modified outside of jsed
  - example
    - KATEX_ISLAND: a node that has katex rendered into it; such a node should not be recursed into because it has a lot of internal elements generated by katex; it should also be edited as latex string and not directly in the DOM
- TOKEN
  - A "jsed token" - usually a span tag that wraps consecutive non-whitespace text.  A cursor deals with TOKEN's (not individual characters).
- ANCHOR
  - When an F_ELEM that can contain TOKEN's has none, we can insert a ANCHOR .  This can act as a visual marker or placeholder to show that text could be inserted at this point in the DOM.
  - In fact we add ANCHOR's to any LINE_SEGMENT if it is exhausted of TOKEN's
  - ANCHOR's are empty TOKEN's.
- FOCUS
  - The current F_ELEM that the user has clicked, touched or navigated to.  This is not a native browser focus because this will conflict with the focus of the input element used in jsed-ui.
- TOKEN_FOCUS
  - TOKEN's have their own focus to distinguish from FOCUS .
  - If someone clicks or touches a TOKEN, we should FOCUS the containing F_ELEM and then focus the TOKEN using TOKEN_FOCUS.
  - To move around tokens the cursor updates the TOKEN_FOCUS whereas to move around F_ELEM's the document navigator updates the FOCUS.
- NEGATIVE_SPACE
  - mdn: "Sequences of white space are collapsed. Newline characters in the source are handled the same as other white space. Lines are broken as necessary to fill line boxes."
  - By default in a lot of html tags such as the p-tag, the spaces between the text is treated as a single space.  Multiple spaces have no effect on the gap.
- POSITIVE_SPACE
  - For some tags notable the pre-tag and for certain css rules (white-space:pre) spacing becomes significant.
  - mdn: "Sequences of white space are preserved. Lines are only broken at newline characters in the source and at <br> elements."
- LINE
  - A non-inline parent node that directly contains text nodes that will be tokenized.  If this node contains inline or inline-flow elements, these are treated as part of the same LINE and should be recursed into and tokenized.  Floats and other types of inlines eg inline-block or inline-flex or tables or list items are treated as new LINE's.
- SIBLING
  - the next or previous (DOM) siblings for TOKEN's and F_ELEM's; we may have to negotiate hidden editing artifacts like undo or markers etc that are not intended to be part of the document's content.
- LINE_SIBLING
  - for TOKEN's in a LINE, LINE_SIBLING's are the next or previous TOKEN in the LINE.  This may or may not be a (TOKEN) SIBLING as the LINE may contain inline F_ELEM's such as an em-tag.
- IMPLICIT_LINE
  - Text nodes in the DOM that belong to a LINE F_ELEM that also contains nested LINE F_ELEM's.  Example: `<div><p>nested, not implicit</p> this text needs an implicit LINE<div>` .  Ideally, in the above example the "loose" text should be in a p-tag.  We could prompt the user to do this.  But at the very least, we can inject an inline span tag that wraps these and acts as an "implicit line of text".
  - In practice we look for text nodes that have a LINE (non-inline element) as a previous sibling.
- LINE_SEGMENT
  - a LINE is divided up into segements if it contains non-TOKEN elements
  - eg `<div>...<em>...</em>...</div>` has 3 segments where `...` are just TOKEN's
  - the middle LINE_SEGMENT represents all possible text for the `em` whereas the other 2 LINE_SEGMENT's are parts belonging to `div`.  We might call the latter PARTITION's.
- SIB_HIGHLIGHT - when a user focuses on an element via TAB_FOCUS or an action like REC_NEXT etc
- ISLAND
  - an "island" is an F_NONREC that we navigate "onto" but never "into";
  - example: KATEX_ISLAND `<div class="katex">...</div>`
- COLLAPSED_TOKEN / COLLAPSE a token
  - a TOKEN that will not have any spaces between it an other tokens
  - we create spaces between tokens by appending a space after the text content
  - to get a collapsed state we simply remove the trailing space
  - we add a class to identify the token is collapsed in case we want to highlight it
  - most of the time we want uncollapsed tokens in NEGATIVE_SPACE .  But we can toggle them to COLLAPSE them if we want.  eg `<em>foo<strong>bar</strong>baz</em>` have `foo`, `bar` and `baz` in collapsed states.  `<em>foo <strong>bar </strong>baz </em>` are in uncollapsed states.
- JOIN
  - when a TOKEN (t) is JOIN'ed with the next or previous (p), p is remove and its text is appended or prepended respectively to t.
- SPLIT_BY_TOKEN
  - the operation of splitting a TOKEN's parent before or after a TOKEN
  - the split applies to the parent which may be the LINE of the TOKEN, but it could also be an inline element eg an em-tag
  - SPLIT_BY_TOKEN let's us split LINE's and anything below
  - but LINE itself is always the parent of the TOKEN we're splitting at, so we can never split beyond LINE; this leads to SPLIT_BY_LINE
- SPLIT_BY_LINE
  - the operation of splitting a LINE's parent element (F_ELEM) before or after the LINE.
  - SPLIT_BY_LINE can be executed with or without reference to a TOKEN
    - if our cursor is on a TOKEN we might SPLIT_BY_LINE by finding the LINE of the token and splitting it's parent before the line (or after).  An example might be splitting an `li` before the `p` where the user's currently selected TOKEN lies in `p`.
    - if we're just focued on the LINE as an F_ELEM, could also elect to split the parent before or after the LINE.

## Outdated

- TABS
  - deontes a set of HTMLElements that have had `tabindex` added to make them focusable
- TAB_FOCUS
  - describes the ability to hit tab or shift+tab and traverse all F_ELEM's recursively depth-first (for F_NONREC's we don't recurse into their child elements)
  - we can achieve this by just setting but `tabIndex="0"` on elements that are not already focusable
- TAB_FOCUS_NONREC_FOCUSABLE
  - situation where F_NONREC's that contain IF_ELEM's will still be accessible via the tab key
  - TODO: we may need to handle this situation